<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			
<h2>V</h2>
<h3>1</h3>
<p>
It was quite a long letter—signed with a large
“Bob” set crosswise. It began by asking
her advice about a wedding present for Harriett
and ended with the suggestion that she should
meet him and help him to make a suitable selection.
It was written from the British Chess
Club, to her, because Bob Greville wanted to see
her. Harriett’s wedding present was only an
excuse. She flung the envelope and the two
sheets of notepaper, spread loose, on her blue
coverlet and smiled into her cup as she finished
her coffee. Old Bob did not know that he had
clad her in armour. He wanted to meet her alone.
They two people were to meet and talk, without
any reason, because they wanted to. But what
could she have to say to anyone who thought
that Mrs. Caudle’s Curtain Lectures, even a nice
edition bound in calf, or How to be Happy
though Married, suitable for a wedding present
for Harriett, or for anybody? Still, they might
write to each other. It was right that letters,
secret letters, should be brought into her blue
room in the morning with her breakfast. She
dropped out of bed smiling and sniffed at the
roses she had worn the day before, standing in a
glass on her washstand, freshened, half faded,
half fresh, intoxicating as she bent over them.
She dressed, without drawing back her curtains,
in the soft rose-blue light, singing Mrs. Kronen’s
song in an undertone.
</p>
<h3>2</h3>
<p>
At eleven o’clock Mrs. Corrie swept into the
schoolroom. Miriam looked easily up at her
from the dreamy thicket where she and the children
had spent their hour, united and content,
speaking in undertones, getting easily through
books that had seemed tiresome and indifferent
the day before. She had felt the play of her mind
on theirs and their steady adult response. They
had joined as conspirators in this mad contemptible
business of mastering the trick of the text-book,
each dreaming the while his own dream.
</p>
<p>
“You darlings,” cried Mrs. Corrie, “how
sweet you all look!” They raised drunken eyes
and beamed drowsily at her. “Give them a
holiday,” said Mrs. Corrie, raising her hands over
the table like a conductor about to start an
orchestra. “Give them a holiday—a picnic—and
come and buy hats!”
</p>
<p>
In a moment the room was in an uproar of
capering figures. “Hats! A new hat for Rollo!
Heaps of cash! I’ve got heaps of cash!”
</p>
<p>
Miriam blinked from her thicket. This was
anarchy; she felt herself sliding. But they were
so old. All so old and experienced. She so young,
by so far the youngest of the four.
</p>
<h3>3</h3>
<p>
Mrs. Corrie sat back in the victoria, her face
alight under the cream lace veil she had twisted
round her soft winter hat, and talked in quiet
clipped phrases: soft shouts. They were driving
swiftly through the fresh warmth of the April
midday.
</p>
<p>
They were off for the afternoon. The commons
gleamed a prelude. Miriam saw that Mrs.
Corrie did not notice them nor think of sweeping
back across them later on through the afternoon
air and seeing them move and gleam in the afternoon
light. She did not think of the bright
shops, the strangely dyed artificial flowers with
their curious fascinating smell interwoven with
the strange warm smell of velvet and chenille
and straw.... Miriam had once bought a hat
in a shop in Kensington. As long as it lasted it
had kept for her whenever she looked at its
softly dyed curiously plaited straw something of
the exciting fascination of the shop, the curious
faint flat odours of millinery, the peculiar dim
warm smell of silks and velvets—silk, China and
Japan, silkworms weaving shining threads in the
dark. Even when it had become associated with
outings and events and shabby with exposure it
remained each time she took it afresh from its
box of wrappings, a mysterious sacred thing;
and the soft blending of its colours, the coiled
restraint of its shape, the texture of its snuggled
trimmings were a support, refreshing her thoughts.
She had never known anyone who went regularly
to good hatshops; the sense of them as a part of
life was linked only with Mrs. Kronen—Mrs.
Kronen’s little close toque made of delicately
shaded velvet violets and lined with satin, her
silky peacock blue straw shining with rich filmy
tones, its mass of dull shot blue-green ribbon
and the soft rose pink of its velvet roses. These
hats had excited Mrs. Corrie; the hats and the
sand-coloured silk dust cloak explained her
cheque and her sudden happiness. But they
only made her want to buy hats. The going and
the shops were nothing to her. She talked about
the Kronens as they drove, speaking as though
she wanted Miriam to hear without answering.
“She knows Mrs. Kronen fascinates me,” thought
Miriam.
</p>
<p>
“Ain’t they a pair, lordy ... him divorced
and her divorced and then marryin’ each other.
Ain’t it scandalous, eh?”
</p>
<p>
People like the Corries disapproved of people
like the Kronens, but had them to stay with them
and were excited about their clothes. Miriam
returned to listen to the singing of her body;
it would sing until they got to the station. As
she listened she held firmly clasped the letter she
had addressed to the British Chess Club to say
she would be nowhere near London until the
weddings. “She doesn’t care a rap about him—not
a teeny rap ... she’s a wise lady ...
dollars—that’s the thing,” whispered Mrs. Corrie
gaily. What does she want me to say? thought
Miriam. What would she say if I pretended
to agree?
</p>
<p>
Should she tell her about the weddings?
Perhaps not. It would be time enough, she reflected
rapidly, when she had to ask permission
to go home for them. Mrs. Corrie had not
asked her a single question about things at home,
and if she were to say, “We used to live in a big
house and my father lost nearly all his money
and we live now in a tiny villa and two of my
sisters are to be married,” it would break into
this strange easy new life. It would break the
charm and not bring her any nearer to Mrs.
Corrie. And Mrs. Corrie would not really
understand about the home troubles. Mrs.
Corrie had always been lonely and sad, inside.
She had been an orphan, but brought up by a
wealthy uncle and always living in wealth and
now she seemed to think about nothing but the
children and the house and the garden—hating
theatres and dances and never going to them or
paying visits or seeing the wonder of anything.
She would only say, “Don’t you marry yourself
off, young lady, marriage is a fraud. You wait
for a wealthy one.” Whatever one said to her,
whatever joy one showed her would lead to that.
</p>
<p>
But the two weddings hovered about the
commons. They were a great possession. Nothing
to worry about in them. Gerald and
Bennett who had managed everything since the
smash would manage them. Sarah and Harriet
would be married from the little villa and would
be Mrs. Brodie and Mrs. Ducayne just like
anybody else. So safe. And she herself, free,
getting interesting letters, going up to town
with Mrs. Corrie, no worry, spring hats and the
commons and garden waiting for them. She was
sure she did not want to see the commons overburdened
by the idea of her own wedding. Two
was enough for the present. Of course, some
day—someone, somewhere, wonderful and different
from everyone else. Cash—no, not business
and cigars and offices ... the city, horrible
bloated men with shapeless figures, horrible
chemists’ shops advertising pick-me-ups ... a
cottage—a cottage. Why did people laugh at
love in a cottage? The outsides of cottages were
the best part, everyone said. They were dark
inside; but why not? A lamp; and outside
the garden and the light.
</p>
<p>
“She’s had all <em>kinds</em> of operations,” mused
Mrs. Corrie.
</p>
<p>
“<em>Really?</em>”
</p>
<p>
“Deadly awful. In nursing homes. She’ll
never have any kiddies.”
</p>
<p>
Were there cold shadows on everything, everywhere?
</p>
<p>
She turned a pleading face to Mrs. Corrie.
They were driving into the station yard.
</p>
<p>
“It’s true, true, true,” laughed Mrs. Corrie.
“She doesn’t care, she doesn’t want any. They’re
all like that, that sort.”
</p>
<p>
Miriam mused intensely. She felt Mrs. Kronen
ought to be there to answer. She had some
secret Mrs. Corrie did not possess. Mrs. Corrie
looked suddenly small and mild and funny.
Why did she think it dreadful that Mrs. Kronen
should have no children? There was nothing
wonderful in having children. It was better to
sing. She was perfectly sure that she herself did
not want children.... “Superior women don’t
marry,” she said, “sir she said, sir she said,
su, per, <em>i</em>, or women”—but that meant blue
stockings.
</p>
<h3>4</h3>
<p>
“I don’t want a silly hat,” said Mrs. Corrie,
as their hansom drew up in bright sunlight outside
a milliner’s at the southern end of Regent
Street. “Let’s buy a real lovely teapot or a
Bartolozzi or somethin’. What fun to go home
with somethin’ real nice. Eh? A real real
beauty Dresden teapot,” she chanted, floating
into the dimness of the shop where large hats
standing on long straight stands flared softly
like blossoms in the twilight.
</p>
<p>
She swept about in her flowing lace-trimmed
twine-coloured overcoat on the green velvet
carpet, or stood ruthlessly trying on a hat,
pressing its wire frame to fit her head, crushing
her fingers into tucked tulle, talking and trying,
and discarding until the collection was exhausted.
Miriam sat angry and admiring, wondering at the
subdued helplessness of the satin-clad assistant,
sorry for the discarded hats lying carelessly about,
their glory dimmed. All the hats, whatever
their shape or colour seemed to her to decorate
the bronze head and the twine-coloured coat.
The little toques gave slenderness and willowy
height, and the large flowered ribboned hats, the
moment a veil draped the boniness of the face
made, Miriam felt, an entrancing picturesqueness.
With each hat Mrs. Corrie addressed the large
mirror calling herself a freak, a sketch, a nightmare,
a real real fogey.
</p>
<h3>5</h3>
<p>
The process seemed endless and Miriam sat at
last scourging herself with angry questions.
“Why doesn’t she decide,” she found herself
repeating almost aloud, her hot tired eyes turning
for relief to the soft guipure-edged tussore
curtain screening the lower part of the window,
“what kind of hat she really wants and then
look at the few most like it and perhaps have one
altered?...” “It’s so awfully silly not to have
a plan. She’ll go on simply for ever.” But the
soft curtain running so evenly along its smooth
clean brass rod was restful, and plan or no plan
the trouble would presently come to an end and
there would be no discomforts to face when it
was over—no vulgar bun shops, no struggling
on to a penny ’bus with your ride perhaps spoiled
by a dreadful neighbour, but Regent Street in
the bright sun, a hansom, a smart obliging driver
with a buttonhole, skimming along to tea somewhere,
the first-class journey home, the carriage
at the station, the green commons.
</p>
<p>
“Perhaps,” said the assistant at last in a
cheerful suggestive furious voice, flinging aside
with just Mrs. Corrie’s cheerful abandon, a large
cream lace hat with a soft fresh mass of tiny
banksia roses under its left brim, “Perhaps
moddom will allow me to make her a shape and
trim it to her own design.”
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Corrie stood arrested in the middle of
the green velvet floor. Wearily Miriam faced
the possibility of the development of this fresh
opportunity for going on for ever.
</p>
<p>
“Wouldn’t that be lovely?” said Mrs. Corrie,
turning to her enthusiastically.
</p>
<p>
“Yes,” said Miriam eagerly. Both women
were facing her and she felt that anything would
be better than their united contemplation of her
brown stuff dress with its square sleeves and her
brown straw hat with black ribbon and its yellow
paper buttercups.
</p>
<p>
“Can’t be did though,” said Mrs. Corrie in a
cold level voice, turning swiftly back to the hats
massed in a confused heap on the mahogany slab.
Standing over them and tweaking at one and
another as she spoke she made a quiet little speech,
indicating that such and such might do for the
garden and such others for driving, some dozen
altogether she finally ordered to be sent at once
to an address in Brook Street where she would
make her final selection whilst the messenger
waited. “Have you got the address all right?”
she wound up; “<em>so</em> kind of you.” “Come
along, you poor thing you look worn out,” she
cried to Miriam, without looking at her as she
swept from the shop. She waved her sunshade
at a passing hansom and as it drew sharply up
with an exciting clatter near the curb she grasped
Miriam’s arm, “Shall we try Perrin’s? It’s
only three doors up.” Miriam glanced along and
caught a glimpse of another hat shop. “Do you
really want to?” she suggested reluctantly.
“No! No! not a bit old spoil sport. Chum
yong, jump in,” laughed Mrs. Corrie.
</p>
<p>
“Oh, if you really want to,” began Miriam,
but Mrs. Corrie, singing out the address to the
driver was putting her into the cab and showing
her how to make an easy passage for the one who
gets last into a hansom by slipping into the near
corner. Her appreciation of this little manœuvre
helped her over her contrition and she responded
with gay insincerity to Mrs. Corrie’s assurance
of the fun they would have over the hats at Mrs.
Kronen’s.... Tea at Mrs. Kronen’s then.
How strange and alarming ... but she felt too
tired to sustain a <em>tête-à-tête</em> at a smart tea shop.
“After tea we’ll drop into a china shop and get
somethin’ real nice,” said Mrs. Corrie excitedly,
as they bowled up Regent Street.
</p>
<h3>6</h3>
<p>
They found Mrs. Kronen in a mauve and white
drawing-room, reclining on a mauve and white
striped settee in a pale mauve tea gown. On a
large low table a frail mauve tea service stood
ready, and Mrs. Kronen rose tall to welcome
them dropping on to the mauve carpet a little
volume bound in pale green velvet. On a second
low table were strawberries in a shallow wide
bowl, a squat jug brimming with cream, dark
wedding cake hiding a pewter plate, a silken bag
unloosed, showing marvellous large various sweetmeats
heavy against its silk lining. As Mrs. Kronen
slurred her fingers across Miriam’s hand she ordered
the manservant who had dipped and gathered up
the green velvet volume to ask for the tea-cakes.
</p>
<h3>7</h3>
<p>
Then this was “Society.” To come so easily
up from the Corries’ beautiful home, via the
West End hat shop to this wonderful West End
flat and eat strawberries in April.... If only
the home people could see. Her fatigue vanished.
Secure from Mrs. Kronen’s notice she sat in a
mauve and white striped chair and contemplated
her surroundings.
</p>
<p>
While they were waiting for the tea-cakes,
Mrs. Kronen trailed about the mauve floor
reciting her impressions of the weather. “So
lovely,” she intoned in her curious half-Cockney.
“I almost—went—out. But I haven’t. I—haven’t—stirred.
It is lovely inside on this sort
of spring day—the <em>light</em>.”
</p>
<p>
She paused and swept about. There <em>is</em> something
about her, thought Miriam. It’s true, the
light inside on a clear spring day.... I never
thought of that. It is somehow spring in here
in the middle of London in some real way. Her
blood leaped and sang as it had done driving
across the commons; but even more sweetly
and keenly. It wouldn’t be, in a dingy room,
even in the country.... It’s an essence—something
you feel in the right surroundings....
What chances these people have. They get the
most out of everything. Get everything in
advance and over and over again. They can go
into the country any minute as well as have clear
light rooms. Nothing is ever grubby. And
London there, all round; London ... London
was a soft, sea-like sound; a sound shutting in
the spring. The spring gleamed and thrilled
through everything in the pure bright room....
She hoped Mrs. Kronen would say no more about
the light. Light, light, light. As the manservant
brewed the tea and the silver teapot shone in the
light as he moved it—silver and strange black
splashes of light—caught and moving in the
room. Drawing off her gloves she felt as if she
could touch the flowing light.... Flowing in
out of the dawn, moving and flowing and brooding
and changing all day, in rooms. Mrs. Kronen
was back on her settee sitting upright in her
mauve gown, all strong soft curves. “That play
of <em>Wilde’s</em> ...” she said. Miriam shook at the
name. “You ought not to miss it. He—has—such—<em>genius</em>.”
<em>Wilde</em> ... <em>Wilde</em> ... a play
in the spring—someone named Wilde. Wild
spring. That was genius. There was something
in the name.... “Never go to the theatre;
never, never, never,” Mrs. Corrie was saying,
“too much of a bore.” Genius ... genius is
an infinite capacity for taking pains. Capacity.
A silly definition; like a proverb—made up by
somebody who wanted to explain.... Wylde,
Wilde.... Spring.... Genius.
</p>
<h3>8</h3>
<p>
The little feast was over and Mrs. Kronen was
puffing at a cigarette when the hats were announced.
As the fine incense reached her Miriam
regretted that she had not confessed to being a
smoker. The suggestion of tobacco brought the
charm of the afternoon to its height. When the
magic of the scented cloud drew her eyes to Mrs.
Kronen’s face it was almost intolerable in its
keenness. She gazed wondering whether Mrs.
Kronen felt so nearly wild with happiness as she
did herself.... Life what are you—what is
life? she almost said aloud. The face was uplifted
as it had been in the photograph, but with
all the colour, the firm bows of gold hair, the
colour in the face and strong white pillar of neck,
the eyes closed instead of staring upwards and
the rather full mouth flattened and drooping
with its weight into a sort of tragic shapeliness—like
some martyr ... that picture by Rossetti,
Beata Beatrix, thought Miriam ... perfect
reality. She liked Mrs. Kronen for smoking like
that. She was not doing it for show. She would
have smoked in the same way if she had been alone.
She probably wished she was, as Mrs. Corrie did
not smoke. How she must have hated missing
her smokes at Newlands, unless she had smoked
in her room.
</p>
<p>
“It’s—a—mis-take,” said Mrs. Kronen incredulously,
in response to the man’s announcement
of the arrival of the hats. She waved her
cigarette “imperiously,” thought Miriam, “how
she enjoys showing off” ... to and fro in time
with her words. Mrs. Corrie rose laughing and
explaining and apologising. Waving her cigarette
about once more Mrs. Kronen ordered the
hats to be brought in and her maid to be summoned,
but retained her expression of vexed
incredulity. She’s simply longing for us to be
off now, thought Miriam, and changed her
opinion a few moments later when Mrs. Kronen,
assuming on the settee the reclining position in
which they had found her when they came in,
disposed one by one of the hats as Mrs. Corrie
and the maid freed them from their boxes and
wrappings, with a little flourish of the cigarette
and a few slow words.... “Im-poss-i-ble;
not-in-key-with-your-lines; slightly <em>too ingénue</em>,”
etc.: to three or four she gave a grudging
approval, whereupon Mrs. Corrie who was
laughing and pouncing from box to box would
stand upright and pace holding the favoured hat
rakishly on her head. The selection was soon
made and Miriam, whose weariness had returned
with the millinery, was sent off to instruct the
messenger that three hats had been selected and
a bill might be sent to Brook Street in the morning.
</p>
<p>
As she was treating with the messenger in the
little mauve and white hall, Mrs. Corrie came
out and tapped her on the shoulder. Turning,
Miriam found her smiling and mysterious.
“We’re going by the 5.30,” she whispered.
“Would you like to go for a walk for half an hour
and come back <em>here</em>?”
</p>
<p>
“<em>Rather!</em>” said Miriam heartily, with a
break in her voice and feeling utterly crushed.
The beautiful clear room. She loved it and belonged
to it. She was turned out. “All right,”
smiled Mrs. Corrie encouragingly and disappeared.
Under the eyes of the messenger and the servants
who were coming out of the boudoir laden with
hat boxes, she got herself out through the door.
</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
