<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h2>
			<p>The West End street⁠ ⁠… grey buildings rising on either side, feeling away into the approaching distance⁠—angles sharp against the sky⁠ ⁠… softened angles of buildings against other buildings⁠ ⁠… high moulded angles soft as crumb, with deep undershadows⁠ ⁠… creepers fraying from balconies⁠ ⁠… strips of window blossoms across the buildings, scarlet, yellow, high up; a confusion of lavender and white pouching out along a dipping sill⁠ ⁠… a wash of green creeper up a white painted house front⁠ ⁠… patches of shadow and bright light.⁠ ⁠… Sounds of visible near things streaked and scored with broken light as they moved, led off into untraced distant sounds⁠ ⁠… chiming together.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Wide golden streaming Regent Street was quite near. Some near narrow street would lead into it.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Flags of pavement flowing along⁠—smooth clean grey squares and oblongs, faintly polished, shaping and drawing away⁠—sliding into each other.⁠ ⁠… I am part of the dense smooth clean paving stone⁠ ⁠… sunlit; gleaming under dark winter rain; shining under warm sunlit rain, sending up a fresh stony smell⁠ ⁠… always there⁠ ⁠… dark and light⁠ ⁠… dawn, stealing.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Life streamed up from the close dense stone. With every footstep she felt she could fly.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The little dignified high-built cut-through street, with its sudden walled-in church, swept round and opened into brightness and a clamour of central sounds ringing harshly up into the sky.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The pavement of heaven.</p>
			<p>To walk along the radiant pavement of sunlit Regent Street forever.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>She sped along looking at nothing. Shops passed by, bright endless caverns screened with glass⁠ ⁠… the bright teeth of a grand piano running along the edge of its darkness, a cataract of light pouring down its raised lid; forests of hats; dresses, shining against darkness, bright headless crumpling stalks; sly, silky, ominous furs; metals, cold and clanging, brandishing the light; close prickling fire of jewels⁠ ⁠… strange people who bought these things, touched and bought them.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>She pulled up sharply in front of a window. The pavement round it was clear, allowing her to stand rooted where she had been walking, in the middle of the pavement, in the midst of the tide flowing from the clear window, a soft fresh tide of sunlit colours⁠ ⁠… clear green glass shelves laden with shapes of fluted glass, glinting transparencies of mauve and amber and green, rose-pearl and milky blue, welded to a flowing tide, freshening and flowing through her blood, a sea rising and falling with her breathing.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The edge had gone from the keenness of the light. The street was a happy, sunny, simple street⁠—small. She was vast. She could gather up the buildings in her arms and push them away, clearing the sky⁠ ⁠… a strange darkling and she would sleep. She felt drowsy, a drowsiness in her brain and limbs and great strength, and hunger.</p>
			<p>A clock told her she had been away from Brook Street ten minutes. Twenty minutes to spare. What should she do with her strength? Talk to someone or write⁠ ⁠… Bob; where was Bob? Somewhere in the West End. She would write from the West End a note to him in the West End.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>There were no cheap shops in Regent Street. She looked about. Across the way a little side street showing a small newspaper shop offered help.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Thoroughly frightened she hurried with clenched hands down the little mean street ready to give up her scheme at the first sight of an unfriendly eye. “We went through those <em>awful</em> side streets off the West End; I was <em>terrified</em>; I didn’t know <em>where</em> he was driving us,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Poole had said about a cabman driving to the theatre⁠ ⁠… and her face as she sat in her thick pink dress by the dining-room fire had been cunning and mean and full of terror. A small shop appeared close at hand, there were newspaper posters propped outside it and its window was full of flyblown pipes, toilet requisites, stationery and odd-looking books. “Letters may be left here,” said a dirty square of cardboard in the corner of the window. “That’s all right,” thought Miriam, “it’s a sort of agency.” She plunged into the gloomy interior. “<em>Yes!</em>” shouted a tall stout man with a red coarse face coming forward, as if she had asked something that had made him angry. “I want some notepaper, just a little, the smallest quantity you have and an envelope,” said Miriam, quivering and panic-stricken in the hostile atmosphere. The man turned and whisked a small packet off a shelf, throwing it down on the counter before her. “One penny!” bellowed the man as she took it up. “Oh, thank you,” murmured Miriam ingratiatingly putting down twopence. “Do you sell pencils?” The man’s great fingers seemed an endless time wrenching a small metal-sheathed pencil from its card. The street outside would have closed in and swallowed her up forever if she did not quickly get away.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>“Dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Greville,” she wrote in a clear bold hand.⁠ ⁠… He won’t expect me to have that kind of handwriting, like his own, but stronger. He’ll admire it on the page and then hear a man’s voice, Pater’s voice talking behind it and not like it. Me. He’d be a little afraid of it. She felt her hard self standing there as she wrote, and shifted her feet a little, raising one heel from the ground, trying to feminise her attitude; but her hat was hard against her forehead, her clothes would not flow.⁠ ⁠… “Just imagine that I am in town⁠—I could have helped you with your shopping if I had known I was coming.⁠ ⁠…” The first page was half filled. She glanced at her neighbours, a woman on one side and a man on the other, both bending over telegram forms in a careless preoccupied way⁠—wealthy, with expensive clothes with West End lines.⁠ ⁠… Regent Street was Salviati’s. It was Liberty’s and a music shop and the shop with the chickens. But most of all it was Salviati’s. She feared the officials behind the long grating could see by the expression of her shoulders that she was a scrubby person who was breaking the rules by using one of the little compartments with its generosity of ink and pen and blotting paper, for letter writing. Someone was standing impatiently just behind her, waiting for her place. “<i xml:lang="fr">Telle est la vie</i>,” she concluded with a flourish, “yours sincerely,” and addressed the envelope in almost illegible scrawls. Guiltily she bought a stamp and dropped the letter with a darkening sense of guilt into the box. It fell with a little muffled plop that resounded through her as she hurried away towards Brook Street. She walked quickly, to make everything surrounding her move more quickly. London revelled and clamoured softly all round her; she strode her swiftest heightening its clamorous joy. The West End people, their clothes, their carriages and hansoms, their clean bright spring-filled houses, their restaurants and the theatres waiting for them this evening, their easy way with each other, the mysterious something behind their faces, was hers. She, too, now had a mysterious secret face⁠—a West End life of her own.⁠ ⁠…</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
